README.md, before:

<img height="150" src="https://i.imgur.com/O7MMp7A.png" alt="Heart Project logo">

[The Heart Project][heart] provides a general-purpose add-on library for
[the jMonkeyEngine (JME) game engine][jme].

It contains 3 sub-projects:

1. HeartLibrary: the Heart runtime library and its automated tests
2. HeartExamples: demos, examples, and non-automated test software
3. J3oDump: a command-line utility to dump J3O assets

Complete source code (in Java) is provided under
[a 3-clause BSD license][license].

Many other libraries (including [Acorus], [jme3-wireframe], [JmePower],
[Minie], [SkyControl], and [Wes])
depend on the Heart Library.


<a name="toc"></a>

## Contents of this document

+ [Important features](#features)
+ [How to add Heart to an existing project](#add)
+ [How to build Heart from source](#build)
+ [Downloads](#downloads)
+ [Conventions](#conventions)
+ [History](#history)
+ [Acknowledgments](#acks)


<a name="features"></a>

## Important features

+ debugging aids:
  + `Dumper` to concisely dump a scene graph or a subtree thereof, or to
     dump appstates or viewports
  + `Validate` to validate arguments passed to a library method
  + `AxesVisualizer` to visualize the coordinate axes of a `Node`
  + `BoundsVisualizer` to visualize the world bounds of a `Spatial`
  + `PointVisualizer` to visualize a particular location in the world
  + `SkeletonVisualizer` to visualize the bones/joints of an animated model
  + `VectorVisualizer` to visualize a vector
  + `MyAsset.createDebugMaterial()` to visualize mesh normals
     with or without gamma correction
  + `MyMesh.boneWeightMaterial()` to visualize bone weights in a `Mesh`
+ `Mesh` subclasses:
  + `Dodecahedron`, `Icosahedron`, `Octahedron`, and `Tetrahedron`
    to generate meshes for Platonic solids
  + `Cone`, `DomeMesh`, `Icosphere`, `Octasphere`, and `Prism`
    to generate familiar 3-D shapes
  + `RectangleMesh` to generate custom quads
  + `DiscMesh` and `RoundedRectangle` to generate eye-pleasing backgrounds
    for user-interface text
+ `MyMesh` utilities to analyze and manipulate JMonkeyEngine meshes:
  + compress a `Mesh` by introducing an index buffer
  + expand a `Mesh` to ensure no vertex data are re-used
  + generate normals for an outward-facing sphere, a faceted mesh,
    or a smooth mesh
  + translate all vertices of a `Mesh`
  + merge 2 meshes into one
  + flip mesh normals and/or triangle windings
  + enumerate all vertices in a scene-graph subtree
  + convert mesh triangles to lines
+ JME-oriented math:
  + generate pseudo-random quaternions and vectors
  + interpolate and cardinalize quaternions and vectors
  + other useful operations on scalars, quaternions, vectors,
    arrays, and buffers
  + generate 2-D Perlin noise
+ loaders for `Properties` and `String` assets
+ `ContrastAdjustmentFilter`
+ an `AppState` to manage `ViewPort` updating
+ and much, much more!

[Jump to table of contents](#toc)


<a name="add"></a>

## How to add Heart to an existing project

Adding the Heart Library to an existing [jMonkeyEngine][jme] project should be
a simple matter of adding it to the classpath.

Heart comes pre-built as a single library that depends on
the standard "jme3-core" library from jMonkeyEngine.

For projects built using Maven or [Gradle], it is sufficient to specify the
dependency on the Heart Library.  The build tools should automatically
resolve the remaining dependencies.

### Gradle-built projects

Add to the project’s "build.gradle" file:

    repositories {
        mavenCentral()
    }
    dependencies {
        implementation 'com.github.stephengold:Heart:7.3.0'
    }

For some older versions of Gradle,
it's necessary to replace `implementation` with `compile`.

### Maven-built projects

Add to the project’s "pom.xml" file:

    <repositories>
      <repository>
        <id>mvnrepository</id>
        <url>https://repo1.maven.org/maven2/</url>
      </repository>
    </repositories>

    <dependency>
      <groupId>com.github.stephengold</groupId>
      <artifactId>Heart</artifactId>
      <version>7.3.0</version>
    </dependency>

### Ant-built projects

For projects built using [Ant], download the library from GitHub:

+ https://github.com/stephengold/Heart/releases/latest

You'll want the class jar
and probably the `-sources` and `-javadoc` jars as well.

Open the project's properties in the IDE (JME 3.2 SDK or NetBeans 8.2):

1. Right-click on the project (not its assets) in the "Projects" window.
2. Select "Properties" to open the "Project Properties" dialog.
3. Under "Categories:" select "Libraries".
4. Click on the "Compile" tab.
5. Add the `Heart` class jar:
  + Click on the "Add JAR/Folder" button.
  + Navigate to the download folder.
  + Select the "Heart-7.3.0.jar" file.
  + Click on the "Open" button.
6. (optional) Add jars for javadoc and sources:
  + Click on the "Edit" button.
  + Click on the "Browse..." button to the right of "Javadoc:"
  + Select the "Heart-7.3.0-javadoc.jar" file.
  + Click on the "Open" button.
  + Click on the "Browse..." button to the right of "Sources:"
  + Select the "Heart-7.3.0-sources.jar" file.
  + Click on the "Open" button again.
  + Click on the "OK" button to close the "Edit Jar Reference" dialog.
7. Click on the "OK" button to exit the "Project Properties" dialog.

[Jump to table of contents](#toc)


<a name="build"></a>

## How to build Heart from source

1. Install a [Java Development Kit (JDK)][openJDK],
   if you don't already have one.
2. Point the `JAVA_HOME` environment variable to your JDK installation:
  + using Bash: `export JAVA_HOME="` *path to installation* `"`
  + using Windows Command Prompt: `set JAVA_HOME="` *path to installation* `"`
  + using PowerShell: `$env:JAVA_HOME = '` *path to installation* `'`
3. Download and extract the Heart source code from GitHub:
  + using Git:
    + `git clone https://github.com/stephengold/Heart.git`
    + `cd Heart`
    + `git checkout -b latest 7.3.0`
  + using a web browser:
    + browse to [the latest release][latest]
    + follow the "Source code (zip)" link
    + save the ZIP file
    + extract the contents of the saved ZIP file
    + `cd` to the extracted directory/folder
4. Run the [Gradle] wrapper:
  + using Bash or PowerShell: `./gradlew build`
  + using Windows Command Prompt: `.\gradlew build`

After a successful build,
Maven artifacts will be found in `HeartLibrary/build/libs`.

You can install the artifacts to your local Maven repository:
+ using Bash or PowerShell: `./gradlew install`
+ using Windows Command Prompt: `.\gradlew install`

You can restore the project to a pristine state:
+ using Bash or PowerShell: `./gradlew clean`
+ using Windows Command Prompt: `.\gradlew clean`

[Jump to table of contents](#toc)


<a name="downloads"></a>

## Downloads

Newer releases (since v4.5.0) can be downloaded from
[GitHub](https://github.com/stephengold/Heart/releases).

Older releases (v0.9.5 through v4.4.0) can be downloaded from
[the Jme3-utilities Project](https://github.com/stephengold/jme3-utilities/releases).

Newer Maven artifacts (since v6.3.0) are available from
[MavenCentral](https://search.maven.org/artifact/com.github.stephengold/Heart).

Old Maven artifacts (v5.0.0 through v6.4.0) are available from JCenter.

[Jump to table of contents](#toc)


<a name="conventions"></a>

## Conventions

Package names begin with `jme3utilities`

The source code is compatible with JDK 7.
The pre-built libraries are compatible with JDK 8.

[Jump to table of contents](#toc)


<a name="history"></a>

## History

The evolution of this project is chronicled in
[its release log][log].

The oldest parts of the Heart Library were originally included in [SkyControl].

From May 2017 to February 2020, Heart was a sub-project of
[the Jme3-utilities Project][utilities].

Since February 2020, Heart has been a separate project, hosted at
[GitHub][heart].

[Jump to table of contents](#toc)


<a name="acks"></a>

## Acknowledgments

Like most projects, the Heart Project builds on the work of many who
have gone before.  I therefore acknowledge the following
software developers:

 + "jayfella", for creating and sharing the original `Icosphere.java`
 + Paul Speed, for helpful insights
 + "rvandoosselaer", for reporting and fixing issue #2.
 + plus the creators of (and contributors to) the following software:
    + the [Blender] 3-D animation suite
    + the [FindBugs] source-code analyzer
    + the [Firefox] and [Chrome] web browsers
    + the [Git] revision-control system and GitK commit viewer
    + the [Gradle] build tool
    + the [IntelliJ IDEA][idea] and [NetBeans] integrated development environments
    + the [Java] compiler, standard doclet, and runtime environment
    + [jMonkeyEngine][jme] and the jME3 Software Development Kit
    + the [Linux Mint][mint] operating system
    + LWJGL, the Lightweight Java Game Library
    + the [Markdown] document-conversion tool
    + the [Meld] visual merge tool
    + Microsoft Windows
    + the PMD source-code analyzer
    + the [WinMerge] differencing and merging tool

I am grateful to [GitHub], [Sonatype], [JFrog], and [Imgur]
for providing free hosting for this project
and many other open-source projects.

I'm also grateful to my dear Holly, for keeping me sane.

If I've misattributed anything or left anyone out, please let me know, so I can
correct the situation: sgold@sonic.net

[Jump to table of contents](#toc)


[acorus]: https://github.com/stephengold/Acorus "Acorus Project"
[ant]: https://ant.apache.org "Apache Ant Project"
[blender]: https://docs.blender.org "Blender Project"
[chrome]: https://www.google.com/chrome "Chrome"
[findbugs]: http://findbugs.sourceforge.net "FindBugs Project"
[firefox]: https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox "Firefox"
[git]: https://git-scm.com "Git"
[github]: https://github.com "GitHub"
[gradle]: https://gradle.org "Gradle Project"
[heart]: https://github.com/stephengold/Heart "Heart Project"
[idea]: https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/ "IntelliJ IDEA"
[imgur]: https://imgur.com/ "Imgur"
[java]: https://java.com "Java"
[jfrog]: https://www.jfrog.com "JFrog"
[jme]: https://jmonkeyengine.org  "jMonkeyEngine Project"
[jme3-wireframe]: https://github.com/joliver82/jme3-wireframe "jME3 Wireframe render library"
[jmepower]: https://github.com/stephengold/JmePower "JmePower Project"
[latest]: https://github.com/stephengold/Heart/releases/latest "latest release"
[license]: https://github.com/stephengold/Heart/blob/master/license.txt "Heart license"
[log]: https://github.com/stephengold/Heart/blob/master/HeartLibrary/release-notes.md "release log"
[markdown]: https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown "Markdown Project"
[meld]: https://meldmerge.org "Meld Project"
[minie]: https://github.com/stephengold/Minie "Minie Project"
[mint]: https://linuxmint.com "Linux Mint Project"
[netbeans]: https://netbeans.org "NetBeans Project"
[openJDK]: https://openjdk.java.net "OpenJDK Project"
[skycontrol]: https://github.com/stephengold/SkyControl "SkyControl Project"
[sonatype]: https://www.sonatype.com "Sonatype"
[utilities]: https://github.com/stephengold/jme3-utilities "Jme3-utilities Project"
[wes]: https://github.com/stephengold/Wes "Wes Project"
[winmerge]: https://winmerge.org "WinMerge Project"

Commit message:

README.md:  add "examples" and "links" sections

README.md, after:

<img height="150" src="https://i.imgur.com/O7MMp7A.png" alt="Heart Project logo">

[The Heart Project][heart] provides a general-purpose add-on library for
[the jMonkeyEngine (JME) game engine][jme].

It contains 3 sub-projects:

1. HeartLibrary: the Heart runtime library and its automated tests
2. HeartExamples: demos, examples, and non-automated test software
3. J3oDump: a command-line utility to dump J3O assets

Complete source code (in Java) is provided under
[a 3-clause BSD license][license].

Many other libraries (including [Acorus], [jme3-wireframe], [JmePower],
[Minie], [SkyControl], and [Wes])
depend on the Heart Library.


<a name="toc"></a>

## Contents of this document

+ [Important features](#features)
+ [How to add Heart to an existing project](#add)
+ [How to build Heart from source](#build)
+ [Downloads](#downloads)
+ [Conventions](#conventions)
+ [An overview of the example applications](#examples)
+ [External links](#links)
+ [History](#history)
+ [Acknowledgments](#acks)


<a name="features"></a>

## Important features

+ debugging aids:
  + `Dumper` to concisely dump a scene graph or a subtree thereof, or to
     dump appstates or viewports
  + `Validate` to validate arguments passed to a library method
  + `AxesVisualizer` to visualize the coordinate axes of a `Node`
  + `BoundsVisualizer` to visualize the world bounds of a `Spatial`
  + `PointVisualizer` to visualize a particular location in the world
  + `SkeletonVisualizer` to visualize the bones/joints of an animated model
  + `VectorVisualizer` to visualize a vector
  + `MyAsset.createDebugMaterial()` to visualize mesh normals
     with or without gamma correction
  + `MyMesh.boneWeightMaterial()` to visualize bone weights in a `Mesh`
+ `Mesh` subclasses:
  + `Dodecahedron`, `Icosahedron`, `Octahedron`, and `Tetrahedron`
    to generate meshes for Platonic solids
  + `Cone`, `DomeMesh`, `Icosphere`, `Octasphere`, and `Prism`
    to generate familiar 3-D shapes
  + `RectangleMesh` to generate custom quads
  + `DiscMesh` and `RoundedRectangle` to generate eye-pleasing backgrounds
    for user-interface text
+ `MyMesh` utilities to analyze and manipulate JMonkeyEngine meshes:
  + compress a `Mesh` by introducing an index buffer
  + expand a `Mesh` to ensure no vertex data are re-used
  + generate normals for an outward-facing sphere, a faceted mesh,
    or a smooth mesh
  + translate all vertices of a `Mesh`
  + merge 2 meshes into one
  + flip mesh normals and/or triangle windings
  + enumerate all vertices in a scene-graph subtree
  + convert mesh triangles to lines
+ JME-oriented math:
  + generate pseudo-random quaternions and vectors
  + interpolate and cardinalize quaternions and vectors
  + other useful operations on scalars, quaternions, vectors,
    arrays, and buffers
  + generate 2-D Perlin noise
+ loaders for `Properties` and `String` assets
+ `ContrastAdjustmentFilter`
+ an `AppState` to manage `ViewPort` updating
+ and much, much more!

[Jump to table of contents](#toc)


<a name="add"></a>

## How to add Heart to an existing project

Adding the Heart Library to an existing [jMonkeyEngine][jme] project should be
a simple matter of adding it to the classpath.

Heart comes pre-built as a single library that depends on
the standard "jme3-core" library from jMonkeyEngine.

For projects built using Maven or [Gradle], it is sufficient to specify the
dependency on the Heart Library.  The build tools should automatically
resolve the remaining dependencies.

### Gradle-built projects

Add to the project’s "build.gradle" file:

    repositories {
        mavenCentral()
    }
    dependencies {
        implementation 'com.github.stephengold:Heart:7.3.0'
    }

For some older versions of Gradle,
it's necessary to replace `implementation` with `compile`.

### Maven-built projects

Add to the project’s "pom.xml" file:

    <repositories>
      <repository>
        <id>mvnrepository</id>
        <url>https://repo1.maven.org/maven2/</url>
      </repository>
    </repositories>

    <dependency>
      <groupId>com.github.stephengold</groupId>
      <artifactId>Heart</artifactId>
      <version>7.3.0</version>
    </dependency>

### Ant-built projects

For projects built using [Ant], download the library from GitHub:

+ https://github.com/stephengold/Heart/releases/latest

You'll want the class jar
and probably the `-sources` and `-javadoc` jars as well.

Open the project's properties in the IDE (JME 3.2 SDK or NetBeans 8.2):

1. Right-click on the project (not its assets) in the "Projects" window.
2. Select "Properties" to open the "Project Properties" dialog.
3. Under "Categories:" select "Libraries".
4. Click on the "Compile" tab.
5. Add the Heart class jar:
  + Click on the "Add JAR/Folder" button.
  + Navigate to the download folder.
  + Select the "Heart-7.3.0.jar" file.
  + Click on the "Open" button.
6. (optional) Add jars for javadoc and sources:
  + Click on the "Edit" button.
  + Click on the "Browse..." button to the right of "Javadoc:"
  + Select the "Heart-7.3.0-javadoc.jar" file.
  + Click on the "Open" button.
  + Click on the "Browse..." button to the right of "Sources:"
  + Select the "Heart-7.3.0-sources.jar" file.
  + Click on the "Open" button again.
  + Click on the "OK" button to close the "Edit Jar Reference" dialog.
7. Click on the "OK" button to exit the "Project Properties" dialog.

[Jump to table of contents](#toc)


<a name="build"></a>

## How to build Heart from source

1. Install a [Java Development Kit (JDK)][openJDK],
   if you don't already have one.
2. Point the `JAVA_HOME` environment variable to your JDK installation:
  + using Bash: `export JAVA_HOME="` *path to installation* `"`
  + using Windows Command Prompt: `set JAVA_HOME="` *path to installation* `"`
  + using PowerShell: `$env:JAVA_HOME = '` *path to installation* `'`
3. Download and extract the Heart source code from GitHub:
  + using Git:
    + `git clone https://github.com/stephengold/Heart.git`
    + `cd Heart`
    + `git checkout -b latest 7.3.0`
  + using a web browser:
    + browse to [the latest release][latest]
    + follow the "Source code (zip)" link
    + save the ZIP file
    + extract the contents of the saved ZIP file
    + `cd` to the extracted directory/folder
4. Run the [Gradle] wrapper:
  + using Bash or PowerShell: `./gradlew build`
  + using Windows Command Prompt: `.\gradlew build`

After a successful build,
Maven artifacts will be found in "HeartLibrary/build/libs".

You can install the artifacts to your local Maven repository:
+ using Bash or PowerShell: `./gradlew install`
+ using Windows Command Prompt: `.\gradlew install`

You can restore the project to a pristine state:
+ using Bash or PowerShell: `./gradlew clean`
+ using Windows Command Prompt: `.\gradlew clean`

[Jump to table of contents](#toc)


<a name="downloads"></a>

## Downloads

Newer releases (since v4.5.0) can be downloaded from
[GitHub](https://github.com/stephengold/Heart/releases).

Older releases (v0.9.5 through v4.4.0) can be downloaded from
[the Jme3-utilities Project](https://github.com/stephengold/jme3-utilities/releases).

Newer Maven artifacts (since v6.3.0) are available from
[MavenCentral](https://search.maven.org/artifact/com.github.stephengold/Heart).

Old Maven artifacts (v5.0.0 through v6.4.0) are available from JCenter.

[Jump to table of contents](#toc)


<a name="conventions"></a>

## Conventions

Package names begin with `jme3utilities`

The source code is compatible with JDK 7.
The pre-built libraries are compatible with JDK 8.

[Jump to table of contents](#toc)


<a name="examples"></a>

## An overview of the example applications

(under construction)

[Jump to table of contents](#toc)


<a name="links"></a>

## External links

+ [the Heart page](https://store.jmonkeyengine.org/e534fc1e-5b78-46b7-a831-d5d40cbd9dcd)
  at [JmonkeyStore](https://store.jmonkeyengine.org)

[Jump to table of contents](#toc)


<a name="history"></a>

## History

The evolution of this project is chronicled in
[its release log][log].

The oldest parts of the Heart Library were originally included in [SkyControl].

From May 2017 to February 2020, Heart was a sub-project of
[the Jme3-utilities Project][utilities].

Since February 2020, Heart has been a separate project, hosted at
[GitHub][heart].

[Jump to table of contents](#toc)


<a name="acks"></a>

## Acknowledgments

Like most projects, the Heart Project builds on the work of many who
have gone before.  I therefore acknowledge the following
software developers:

 + "jayfella", for creating and sharing the original `Icosphere.java`
 + Paul Speed, for helpful insights
 + "rvandoosselaer", for reporting and fixing issue #2.
 + plus the creators of (and contributors to) the following software:
    + the [Blender] 3-D animation suite
    + the [FindBugs] source-code analyzer
    + the [Firefox] and [Chrome] web browsers
    + the [Git] revision-control system and GitK commit viewer
    + the [Gradle] build tool
    + the [IntelliJ IDEA][idea] and [NetBeans] integrated development environments
    + the [Java] compiler, standard doclet, and runtime environment
    + [jMonkeyEngine][jme] and the jME3 Software Development Kit
    + the [Linux Mint][mint] operating system
    + LWJGL, the Lightweight Java Game Library
    + the [Markdown] document-conversion tool
    + the [Meld] visual merge tool
    + Microsoft Windows
    + the PMD source-code analyzer
    + the [WinMerge] differencing and merging tool

I am grateful to [GitHub], [Sonatype], [JFrog], and [Imgur]
for providing free hosting for this project
and many other open-source projects.

I'm also grateful to my dear Holly, for keeping me sane.

If I've misattributed anything or left anyone out, please let me know, so I can
correct the situation: sgold@sonic.net

[Jump to table of contents](#toc)


[acorus]: https://github.com/stephengold/Acorus "Acorus Project"
[ant]: https://ant.apache.org "Apache Ant Project"
[blender]: https://docs.blender.org "Blender Project"
[chrome]: https://www.google.com/chrome "Chrome"
[findbugs]: http://findbugs.sourceforge.net "FindBugs Project"
[firefox]: https://www.mozilla.org/en-US/firefox "Firefox"
[git]: https://git-scm.com "Git"
[github]: https://github.com "GitHub"
[gradle]: https://gradle.org "Gradle Project"
[heart]: https://github.com/stephengold/Heart "Heart Project"
[idea]: https://www.jetbrains.com/idea/ "IntelliJ IDEA"
[imgur]: https://imgur.com/ "Imgur"
[java]: https://java.com "Java"
[jfrog]: https://www.jfrog.com "JFrog"
[jme]: https://jmonkeyengine.org  "jMonkeyEngine Project"
[jme3-wireframe]: https://github.com/joliver82/jme3-wireframe "jME3 Wireframe render library"
[jmepower]: https://github.com/stephengold/JmePower "JmePower Project"
[latest]: https://github.com/stephengold/Heart/releases/latest "latest release"
[license]: https://github.com/stephengold/Heart/blob/master/license.txt "Heart license"
[log]: https://github.com/stephengold/Heart/blob/master/HeartLibrary/release-notes.md "release log"
[markdown]: https://daringfireball.net/projects/markdown "Markdown Project"
[meld]: https://meldmerge.org "Meld Project"
[minie]: https://github.com/stephengold/Minie "Minie Project"
[mint]: https://linuxmint.com "Linux Mint Project"
[netbeans]: https://netbeans.org "NetBeans Project"
[openJDK]: https://openjdk.java.net "OpenJDK Project"
[skycontrol]: https://github.com/stephengold/SkyControl "SkyControl Project"
[sonatype]: https://www.sonatype.com "Sonatype"
[utilities]: https://github.com/stephengold/jme3-utilities "Jme3-utilities Project"
[wes]: https://github.com/stephengold/Wes "Wes Project"
[winmerge]: https://winmerge.org "WinMerge Project"
